export const article = {
  author: 'Brett Schneider',
  date: '2025-07-20',
  title: 'Building an Early-Stage Software Product',
  description:
    'Reflections on shipping zero-to-one with speed: inspiration sources, MVP craft, AI coding tools, Vercel v0 prototyping, and feedback loops.',
}

export const metadata = {
  title: article.title,
  description: article.description,
}

export default (props) => <ArticleLayout article={article} {...props} />

Writing software has never felt more exciting, and I have been eager to capture
why. Since joining MeritFirst and taking another product to launch, I have
reflected on what makes building this time feel different. I have landed on many
new workflows, ideation processes, and problem-solving methods that feel like
they have multiplied my leverage as an engineer. Most engineers can talk your
ear off about the "best" tech stack or the perfect Git flow, but I want to focus
on the net-new ways of thinking and building I have adopted recently.

## Study elite teams

As an entry point to everything, I found one exercise particularly helpful:
compile a list of brilliant startups and study them in the most granular way
possible. Turn over every rock on Twitter, Product Hunt, Reddit, or anywhere
else that helps you find teams with extreme taste, talent, and product
intuition. It is shocking how many resources these companies and their founders
put in plain sight explaining how they operate. If you are lucky, you may even
stumble across a company like PostHog or Resend that publishes its entire
company handbook for the world to see (one of the coolest things I have found).
I have some current favorites, but I could extend the list much further:
[Linear](https://linear.app), [Vercel](https://vercel.com),
[Resend](https://resend.com), [PostHog](https://posthog.com),
[Ramp](https://ramp.com), [Midday](https://midday.ai), [Fey](https://fey.com),
[Dub](https://dub.sh), [Supabase](https://supabase.com),
[Planetscale](https://planetscale.com).

## Design the MVP like the final product

Along the lines of the last point, one blog post has become my north star for
how I think about the zero-to-one phase: Linear's piece on [rethinking the
startup
MVP](https://linear.app/blog/rethinking-the-startup-mvp-building-a-competitive-product).
For a while, the framing of early-stage building was to ship a bunch of stuff
that did not need to look good or be fully functional, then magically perfect it
later. The post argues this no longer works, and I agree. Now, more than ever,
you need to deliver a truly exceptional experience from the beginning.

## Multiply output with AI

No surprise here, but Cursor has been a huge unlock for building at a fast pace.
Delegating low-stakes tasks that would otherwise eat my time when I could be
doing more important work is incredible. One example I like is letting Cursor
nail pixel-perfect loading states once I finish building a new feature. It
delivers that extra polish without the time cost. Things get even more
interesting with tools that allow complete end-to-end AI pull requests. I have
been experimenting with Seer by Sentry and OpenAI's Codex. They are amazing for
triaging and fixing very specific issues on the fly. At first I was hesitant,
but in many cases they provide a solid starting point or even write the correct
code entirely. Having that head start feels like a real difference maker for
fixing bugs, cleaning up UI, and more. If the code is wrong, there is not much
lost; it was generated asynchronously while I tackled other tasks. Sentry's Seer
even opens pull requests automatically for critical bugs, so I always have a
place to start.

The last tool that pleasantly surprised me is CodeRabbit's AI PR reviewer. I
turned it on as an experiment, and it caught some niche issues before they
reached production. Having another safeguard that might catch a bug first is
wonderful. I understand the skepticism around these tools, but when AI
integration does not cost much time or effort, it offers leverage we did not
previously have. The review can be ignored, the Seer pull request can be closed
with one click, and when these tools work, it is pretty incredible to watch.

## Prototype in minutes with v0

I could have squeezed this into the AI section, but v0 needs its own spotlight.
The unlock it provides for every member of my team is wild. Among other things,
v0 lets non-technical colleagues produce working prototypes for the features and
ideas they are exploring. They can then hand off that prototype, with working
code, to the engineering team and give us a fantastic starting point. All of
these AI tools come back to one thing: the jump start. Starting at fifty percent
instead of zero is a massive productivity boost.

On the flip side, v0 is great for communicating my own ideas. Instead of
explaining or sketching, I can present a new version of a feature, or even a
completely new feature, with a functioning UI. If you are skeptical about AI
tooling, at least give v0 a shot. The Vercel team really delivered, and you
might be surprised by how quickly you can go from idea to fully functioning,
shipped feature.

## Close the feedback loop fast

This one is simple. Add an extremely minimal, low-friction feedback,
product-ideas, or bug-report button _everywhere_ in your app. Pipe it to Slack,
email, or whatever lets you see submissions right away. Then, solve a problem
reported through that form quickly, and you will earn user trust in no time.
Many companies do this, but Ramp is spectacular at responding to customer
feedback with speed. I have seen posts where they turn around a bug fix or new
feature in record time, and it is good vibes all around. The customer feels
seen, something important gets fixed or added, and everyone is happy.

This is just one example, but creating as many feedback loops as possible is
vital to understanding whether what you are building is actually helpful. You
should not ship every single feature users request, and Linear's post on
[building what customers
need](https://linear.app/blog/building-what-customers-need) covers that well.
Collecting all feedback, though, lets you make actionable product decisions and
reach out to users who need help, building their trust in your team.

## Parting thoughts

The gloom around AI misses the bigger picture. Jevons Paradox reminds us that
greater efficiency leads to greater use, and we are only at the beginning of
that curve. Writing software has never been more enjoyable or more impactful. I
plan to keep exploring every new tool that appears, and I hope you do the same.
Keep shipping.
