import { ArticleLayout } from '@/components/tailwind/article-layout'
import { tweet } from './tweet.png'

export const article = {
    author: 'Brett Schneider',
    date: '2024-03-26',
    title: "Why Pro Forma-ing Stock-Based Compensation Out of Your Financials Is a Bad Idea",
    description:
        "Removing stock-based compensation from your financial statements may seem appealing, but it's fraught with pitfalls. Here's why.",
}

export const metadata = {
    title: article.title,
    description: article.description,
}

export default (props) => <ArticleLayout article={article} {...props} />

After seeing the buzz around pro forma financials in the tech industry, I felt
compelled to discuss why removing stock-based compensation (SBC) from your
financial statements is a risky move. We'll start with what pro forma financials
entail, delve into the drawbacks of excluding SBC, and finally, explore better
alternatives.

## What are pro forma financials?

Pro forma financials are adjusted statements that reflect the impact of specific
events or transactions, whether past or anticipated. Adjusted EBITDA, for
example, is a common pro forma metric that can exclude this non-cash expense to
show a company’s earnings without the impact of SBC.

Such statements are particularly useful for companies undergoing significant
changes like acquisitions or restructuring, or those wanting to underscore
certain financial aspects not obvious from standard GAAP statements.


## Why pro forma-ing SBC out of your financials is a bad idea

Stock-based compensation is a non-cash expense linked to granting equity options
or other equity forms as employee compensation. It's a staple in the tech
sector, helping attract and retain talent as well as aligning employee interests
with those of the company.

Excluding SBC from your financials is problematic for several reasons:

1. **It Misrepresents Financial Health**: SBC, though not a cash expense, still
   reflects a real cost. Omitting it paints an incomplete and potentially
   misleading picture of your financial health, complicating investor
   assessments of your company’s profitability.

2. **It sets a dangerous precedent**: If you start pro forma-ing SBC out of your
    financials, what’s to stop you from pro forma-ing other expenses as well? This
    can lead to a slippery slope where companies are able to manipulate their
    financial statements to make themselves look more profitable than they
    really are.

3. **It undermines the credibility of your financial statements**: Investors
    rely on your financial statements to make informed investment decisions. If
    they see that you’re pro forma-ing SBC out of your financials, they may
    question the integrity of your financial reporting and be less likely to
    trust the information you provide.

Take a look at how SNAP Inc. (Snapchat) has been criticized for pro forma-ing


## Alternatives to consider

Instead of pro forma-ing SBC out of your financials, consider the following
alternatives:

1. **Reconciliation**: Show your financials with and without SBC. This
   transparency allows investors to understand its impact without skewing the
   overall picture.

2. **Educate investors**: Take the time to explain to investors why you use SBC
    as a form of compensation and how it benefits your business. By educating
    investors about the purpose of SBC and its impact on your financial
    performance, you can help them make more informed investment decisions.

3. **Focus on the long-term**: Remember that SBC is a long-term investment in
    your company’s future. While it may impact your short-term financial
    performance, it can also help you attract and retain top talent, drive
    innovation, and create long-term value for your shareholders.

Excluding SBC from your financial statements is ill-advised due to its potential
to mislead, set precarious precedents, and erode trust. Opt for reconciliation,
investor education, and a focus on long-term benefits instead. These strategies
can help investors and fortify confidence in your financial reporting.

I hope this insight is valuable. For questions or further discussion on this
topic, don't hesitate to reach out. I’m eager to engage with you!

