import { ArticleLayout } from '@/components/tailwind/article-layout'

export const article = {
  author: 'Brett Schneider',
  date: '2024-04-28',
  title: "Navigating the Murky Waters of Derivative Lawsuits",
  description:
    "Derivative lawsuits are meant to protect shareholder interests, but their misuse can misalign incentives and distort the competitive landscape. Here's why.",
}

export const metadata = {
  title: article.title,
  description: article.description,
}

export default (props) => <ArticleLayout article={article} {...props} />

After listening to both of my favorite podcasts, [BG2
Pod](https://twitter.com/BG2Pod) and [All In](https://twitter.com/theallinpod),
discuss the recent ruling in the Elon Musk case, I was inspired to delve deeper
into the complex world of derivative lawsuits and the notorious practice of
ambulance chasing. These legal strategies, while designed to safeguard
shareholder interests, also spotlight significant inefficiencies within our
capital markets, potentially distorting the playing field for investors and
corporations alike.

## Derivative Lawsuits and Ambulance Chasing

Derivative lawsuits, initiated by shareholders against corporate insiders like
executives or directors who have allegedly failed in their duties, are meant as
tools for shareholder activism to address internal mismanagement and protect the
corporation. However, their complexity often leads to misuse. Known as
"ambulance chasing," this practice involves targeting companies suffering from
setbacks to launch lawsuits for quick settlements, exploiting these situations
more for profit than genuine governance reform.

## The Case of Elon Musk and Tesla

Elon Musk's recent experience with Tesla underscores the implications
that derivative lawsuits can have on corporate governance and investor
relations. A Delaware judge recently decreed that Musk's $56 billion
compensation package from 2018 be rescinded, raising questions about the
fairness and integrity of its approval process. This lawsuit, initiated by a
shareholder with just nine shares, argued that the compensation plan was
excessively large and its goals misleadingly portrayed as difficult to achieve.

This sets an unbelievably bad precedent for not only for current founders and
CEOs but also for future ones. The incentive structure in this case could not
have been more aligned for everyone involved. Elon asked to be compensated
solely in stock, contingent on the company achieving very ambitious milestones.
This is the exact type of incentive structure that we want to see in all
companies. If he delivers, the shareholders benefit tremendously. The fact that
a judge can come in and retroactively change the terms of a contract that was
agreed upon by all parties is a dangerous path to go down. This encourges more
of the same old fortune 500 executives who buy back stock and take on debt to
hit short-term objectives. Pardon the informal take, but... These execs are
boring!!! They never do anything interesting that creates long-term value for
the company.  If you look at a company like Ford you will see that they have
been doing this for years and it has not worked out well for them. 

## Stop Making Things Harder for Founders

The last thing we need is to make it more difficult for founders to build
companies. The odds are already stacked against them. It is disheartening to see
that individuals who are trying to build the future are being undermined by
those merely seeking quick profits. We should encourage more people to take
risks and start companies, rather than creating additional mental hurdles for
founders to overcome.

## The Impact on Capital Markets 

These lawsuits significantly undermine efficiency within capital markets by
diverting resources from productive activities. Each dollar spent on litigation
is a dollar not used for innovation, employee development, or shareholder
returns. Furthermore, the threat of litigation can discourage companies from
pursuing bold initiatives that might lead to substantial long-term advancements,
stifling both innovation and progress.

Although derivative lawsuits serve as crucial mechanisms for addressing real
corporate misconduct, their frequent misuse reveals deeper systemic
inefficiencies. These legal strategies, when manipulated, can distort the
competitive landscape and hamper economic growth. Stakeholders must understand
these dynamics and actively push for reforms that discourage frivolous lawsuits
while strengthening mechanisms for genuine corporate accountability. This shift
will guide public companies away from defensive legal stances and towards true
economic and ethical leadership.



